hey does this work hey good morning good
afternoon good evening no matter where
you're coming from
hope you all are doing well welcome back
for another week let's go
what is up everybody yeah
yeah let's go
[Laughter]
oh boy whoo
i saw rascal i saw you coming in with
the raid okay rascal i see you with the
20 okay i see you
welcome in everybody hope you had a
wonderful weekend i hope you are ready
to back that back end back up
because we're going deeper folks
got a little bit more things to cover
we got a little bit more things
we talked about some big words that last
week would have been disrespectful
but tonight we're going to go a little
deeper we're going a little deeper we're
going to talk about the event loop
we're going to talk about the call stack
we're going to talk about queues
we're going to talk about lib event lib
we're going to talk about c and c plus
plus apis what
there's a lot of big words but i promise
they're not going to be disrespectful
you're going to understand it by the
time we get through tonight you're going
to know more
than
most professional javascript developers
i've worked with i want to say most but
a lot of them i've worked with a lot of
javascript engineers that underneath the
hood they don't really know what's
happening tonight you're going to
understand what's happening underneath
the hood both in the browser and when it
comes to node then we're going to take
the project we started last week we're
going to take it even further we're
going to see how we can build out our
own api
it's a lot of
a lot a lot of heat packed in to
tonight's class so i hope you're ready
we're gonna we're gonna take our time
though we're gonna we're gonna revisit a
lot of this stuff we talked about last
class to get warmed up and then we're
getting into the fancy js terms that we
got to learn about
i missed last class should i go back
tonight now i think tonight will be
enough review for you to hang on uh if
you need a little bit more detail go
back and watch the last classes already
on youtube exclamation point youtube you
got it there
welcome everybody
oh boy we got a lot of folks some some
some og's in the crowd tonight i saw
some folks coming back i see y'all
what's going on everybody
hey all right so we got a lot of fun
stuff to get into
we're going to
as always start off with some questions
i always like folks to be able to get in
here uh the question of the day though
we haven't done a question today in a
minute
the question of the day
would you rather be the funniest
or the smartest person alive funniest or
smart put fun or smart in chat for me
fun or smart in chat funniest or
smartest
i don't know i think like the funny
thing is i think to be really funny you
got to be kind of smart too right
funniest we're seeing a lot of fun it's
actually pretty balanced
funniest smart okay i see y'all
got a good group here i mean we're all
here to be we're all here because we
want to be soft well we are software
engineers we're all here to learn more
engineering skills so i think smart kind
of winning out on this one is pretty
given uh but we got a good balance okay
i see y'all
i see y'all i think at the end of the
day
i see the perks of being the funniest i
think it's it's easiest to go about life
being the funniest
there's a clear path being the smartest
i don't know
smart is lonely
oh this is a tough one
because if you would have asked me like
before i was like smart all the way
but yeah i'm gonna i'm gonna stay with
smart i'm gonna say i see the value of
being the funniest i think that's a way
better i think that could be a better
life i'm gonna go with smartest
maybe maybe there's some room to do some
good by being the smartest person that's
right that's the way i'm gonna go
ignorance is bliss
hey
all righty folks as always like to give
folks a few minutes to get in here
i know some of you are running late from
work so no worries you got some
questions folks let's get them in while
we give folks a chance to get in here
and we're going to get into it lots of
lots of lots of lots of heat to get into
tonight folks
what am i sipping today i'm sipping just
regular regular water
but it's in my kombucha cup because i
was running a little late and i just
dumped water into because it was empty
do i like sushi no
i'm vegan so a lot of sushi's off the
table but the vegan sushi
not really my jam
thoughts on chaos
if i i haven't had time
i haven't had time i'm hoping this
weekend i get because i'm not going to
listen to a piece man i got to sit down
and i got i gotta i gotta listen to it
the whole way through
right and so if i don't have that time
i'm not gonna do it so hopefully this
weekend i get a block of time where i
can listen to it the whole way through
but yeah it's it's pretty high up on my
priority list
aka said hey i just found your youtube
channel i'm super far behind i'm a
designer i wasn't really intimidated by
coding love your approach and we look
forward to working through your course a
you're not behind
uh you're part of the ketchup crew and
so if you've done xmission.100 devs here
in chat i'll give you everything you
know about 100 devs you join our discord
you agreed to the rules you join 100
devs on discord you got to click some
emojis and when you do that you'll see
the catch-up crew that's your group you
start through there you be able to work
with others as you work through the
material at your own pace so there we're
not nobody's behind here we're all on
the same roller coaster some of us are
just on the front cars and a few of us
are further back
wife is doing well thank you for
everybody who keeps asking i appreciate
that
oddly send a mod mail and we'll get that
info your way
we're a little behind on mod mail right
now and ask leon but i'll be caught up
hopefully today because we're gonna
we're gonna end a little early today
uh because we're gonna do some some some
working together
and uh i'm going to take some of that
time to catch up on on mod mail and
and ask leon
are we allowed to use modules for 100
hours project absolutely
nickelodeon cartoon network of disney
channel
nickelodeon as a kid cartoon network as
an adult
a few more questions and we're going to
get started
honey said can we still join the
bootcamp absolutely do x-men point 100
devs here in chat it'll give you
everything you need to know and how to
get started with us
i wasn't able to follow for the past
month through the various reasons i
heard about the clean slate can you
elaborate yes
so we starting last week we offered a
clean slate meaning if you missed a few
check-ins if you missed submitting some
homework that would no longer be held
against you your slate is wiped clean
you have to start this week however
checking in
making sure that you're doing your code
wars your anki make sure you're
submitting all the homework going
forward and so if you're if you're a
little behind that's okay slate swipes
clean and going forward you're good to
go
is it still possible to join the
linkedin group yep go ahead and just
join and as we add time we add folks so
i probably do like once a week now now
we're past that class i'll do it like
once a week to add more folks
uh where do we submit homework the links
are in the discord message for today and
they're also in the slides
can you recommend any good links for
starting a podcast i i don't have any if
you find them let me know because we got
to start the 100 deaths podcast
how much money made from free lane
freelancing ah i can't release the
number yet it's really high
it's it's it's kind of like i was like
what it's really we got we got to do it
right we got we got to announce it
somewhere maybe like twitter first or
something like that
but uh it's it's it's way more than i
was expecting
uh so if you haven't filled out
cma see mama if you haven't filled out
the client form fill it out i wanted i
wanted to give folks a week to catch up
to get their stuff into that form
but it's really high
uh with code wars i keep missing little
things i can't figure out it's so
demoralizing when i look at the
solutions no that's that's how you do it
there's no magic way that you learn like
there's just no way that you know how to
solve some code wars you've literally
never seen those those those tools it's
like it's like showing up to a job site
and never having seen a hammer before
and everyone keeps handing you nails and
you don't know what to do with them
because you've never seen a hammer you
can't fault that person for never seen
seeing a hammer before but once they see
a hammer they better know what to do
with it going forward that's the same
thing with code wars you're going to
have so many tools on your tool belt
that you've never seen before you can't
hold your you can't you can't get down
on yourself for not knowing what the
tools are but once you see them
once you see that tool and that solution
then it becomes your goal to never
forget how to use that tool in the
future and so when that same pattern
comes up again
right when that same pattern comes up
again you better believe it's hammer
time exactly
you can't expect a fish to know how to
climb a tree
well
fish is a really weird word it's a lot
of stuff that we think are fish that are
all different things there was a really
cool thread on reddit the other day that
was um like what's your favorite animal
fact and that there is something about
like certain whales and dolphins have
hip bones that support walking and so
the belief is that they like started in
the water went to land and then said
land sucks and went back to the water
i don't know maybe they could climb
trees back in the day who knows
also sharks are older than trees
let's hold on let's think about this for
a second
sharks are older than trees
sharks are older than the rings on
saturn
let's think about that
let's also think that we kill what 10
million sharks oh there's something
weird it's like 10 or 100 million sharks
a year
and uh
only 10 people a year die from shark
attacks so we have like a kill like a kd
ratio of like 10 000 to one on sharks
but they're older than trees
this is what you came here tonight for
folks right it's we came here for you
thought you you thought you were going
to come here to learn about the event
loop
javascript but you got got
it's all shark facts this is this this
whole like this whole rest of this class
is shark facts
100 dev shark week there you go
i'll link the thread
in the follow-up message today's class
it was really cool there's a lot of
animal facts that i didn't know that
were pretty dope
cows killed 20 people a year i i would
think it would be way higher cows are
reckless
all right i think we got our questions
in i think everyone's here
let's get into it uh if you haven't
checked in
please go ahead and check in when you do
exclamation point check-in that does
nothing here in chat but it does give
you the link
you click that link you like and retweet
the the post it helps people find us we
got so many new folks joining each and
every day it's amazing to see and it's
because of all the work that you all do
liking and retweeting
liking and commenting on youtube really
really helps with so many new folks
hundreds and hundreds of new folks are
finding us through youtube each month uh
so i appreciate everyone that gives the
new videos a thumbs up lets them play in
the background uh really does help the
algorithm so
and as i said like your slate has been
wiped clean you have to start checking
in now if you want the benefits come end
of program beautiful
everybody thank you for checking in
office hours this sunday so this sunday
we're gonna have like a a longer office
hours we did the power hour this sunday
about last sunday with this upcoming
sunday uh we will have like a more
traditional office hours we're gonna
review a lot of the code that we do
today so if you go through today and
there's some things that you're still
kind of like hung up on that don't make
sense come to sunday's office hours
we're going to get through it
we're also going to do a little car
practice i can't i can't do the friday
this friday to do card practice so we do
a little car practice during office
hours cause action result for your bank
questions so if tonight some of the code
is a little rough come back sunday if
you have some questions come back sunday
and if you want to see me work through
some car cause action result for some of
the questions we'll do it live come to
office hours on sunday office hours
start to become a little bit more
important going forward uh there's only
so much stuff i can cover during two
weeks or two weeks or like two days a
week for class time and so i'm gonna put
a lot of stuff into office hours just as
a little
a little bit more time to catch up on
stuff a little bit more time to revisit
some ideas and concepts that need to
sink in
we must watch our class on freelancing
we have a whole class on it that'll kind
of answer those questions
cool
networking i need to start networking
again folks we're back in it
all right
we're back in it
we're back in it i need you to start
getting those those coffee chats again
i'm asking just for one one cup one
teeny weensy
one
one eddy bitty coffee jet just one just
one coffee chat please this one
this one
car flex i got one today and one
tomorrow i see you
i see you car
got one today got one tomorrow what's up
let's go congrats that's huge
you got me said all right thank you
thank you
d cop
a decaf coffee chat
what's a decaf coffee chat what do we
think what would that be
what would be a decaf coffee chat
is that is that like what the teeny tiny
t1
i had one today it was awkward those are
our decaf ones yeah our decaf coffee
chats are the ones that just that are
slow that get a little awkward those are
decaf
that's the new tech that's the new term
now when you're on discord and
somebody's like oh how'd your coffee
chat go now it was decaf
it wasn't it was it wasn't it wasn't a
full-bodied coffee chat it was it was
definitely decaf
there we go great new words out in these
streets
what coffee chat please and it better
not be decaf
all right
use the sheet
please be keeping track of the people
you reach out to keeping track of these
coffee chats eventually you're gonna
start putting time into your hit list
and that's all going in the sheet if you
don't have it exclamation point sheet
here in chat click the link in the
slides if you need to slide you can
always do exclamation point slides and
you have access to them
caesar got three chats this week hey
turn up
cool make sure you're using the sheet
folks
uh make sure if you haven't done the
checklist yet you're behind you're
behind you got to get the checklist done
we need these things percolating we need
these things marinating all right we
need these things marinating so make
sure you've gone through the checklist
make sure you've you've done all these
things here
it's part of the homework that i asked
you to submit but i really need you to
do it these things take time to show up
on uh recruiters radars and so we need
you to get these things done i put it
here i'm giving you another shot to get
it done there's examples for everything
if you have questions about this stuff
i'll bring it to office hours but yeah
you got to get this done there's a lot
of little things here that really matter
in the long run and so please please
please make sure you're going through it
um there's something interesting that i
i read about about linkedin
a lot of folks asked about the being
open to work on linkedin
apparently there is a setting that folks
in your organization can't see that
you're open to work for so folks that
wanted to put the open to work thing or
open to opportunities
on their linkedin there is a setting
that makes it so folks in your org can't
actually see it so
cool to know if that's something you
were interested in doing
recruiters only stuff like that yeah so
definitely check that out there are some
extra settings in there
and a lot of people are saying the open
to opportunities is kind of like the
best because you can say oh yeah i'm
open to like i do freelancing on the
side or something like that where you're
not actually looking for new jobs to be
careful and somebody's saying be careful
if you're if your
company has a linkedin recruiter be
careful that might come up yep
alrighty
if you're pushing every day
you should be pushing every day
you're doing a code wars every day and
you're pushing every day
because recruiters love those delicious
green swears
so please make sure you're getting your
code challenges every day make sure
you're pushing those challenges every
day
be sure my square's looking nice all
right so i'd love to hear right those
green squares start to look really nice
right make sure you're pushing every day
not only is it about having a really
good get up but it's also about getting
that practice in every single day so you
become a lean mean code challenge
crushing
interview passing machine
right
and so it's it's it's it's also about
getting the green squares but it's also
about getting your brain into this habit
of solving code challenges every day so
by the time you're ready to interview
and you have to solve a coding challenge
easy
easy it's what we do it's what we do
every single day this is how we stand
out this is how we slam dunk on the
other candidates that are going out for
the same positions they're not putting
in the work that you're putting in
briar we have a whole class on git and
github that you can watch yeah
let's go to youtube exclamation point
youtube
boom shakalaka exactly so all right push
every day
submitting your homework if you have not
submitted your uh freelancing
information yet please do so
um for some folks they have like a weird
situation where they're doing like an
hourly rate so if you like withheld
filling it out because you have an
hourly rate just estimate how many hours
you're going to have worked and put that
number in for me please
yep
so please
if you held off because you're doing
like you got like some folks at a
contract but it's like an hourly rate
just whatever that hourly rate was
estimate the number of hours and fill
that number in
and just put the number in there for me
it sucks have to go and clean it up so
if you haven't yet please go ahead and
fill in the freelancing submission i
want to hear about if you got a paid
client if you volunteered or if you
contributed to open source software
i think we're we're close to uh
well one second let's see
yeah
we're almost at a thousand people that
filled out that form
so
if you haven't yet already go ahead and
fill that out for me please i really do
appreciate it i want to see where you're
up to
even if it's no fill it out so i know
where you're at
all right if you haven't submitted the
work from last week the checklist the
100 hours the code wars i left up the
link for you so you can do it
right so you can do it
preston said i've been so busy hey
that's why i'm guessing hey look i got
you look look look i got you come on now
get in here i'll give you extra days to
get this stuff done i got you
i got you come on get in
no worries i didn't take a look at it
last week i won't know just submit it i
won't look at the time stamps i got you
get in
alrighty
i got a new client should i resubmit yes
but just put the new client amount don't
don't like add both the amounts to
submit the new the new amount
cool
all right and then last but not least
you have to be doing banky
bank is what helps our students get jobs
when my student like when when folks
from previous cohorts come back and they
say
leon thank you one of the things that
they almost always bring up is that
banky came up during their interview
process the questions that were on the
bank came up the questions that were on
the bank made them feel more confident
in their answers it's something you got
to commit to doing every day and you got
it
you got to start now
you can't you really can't put it off
another week
you really can't put it off another two
weeks if you don't start now to be too
much right as we're hitting our stride
whereas we're trying to go into the
interview process you're still going to
not have it done and so you've really
got to start this week
if you don't feel comfortable going
through it by yourself
grab a group and do it on discord
together
just post in general posting your study
chat study community whatever you need
to do
find a group of folks work through it
together if you can't do it by yourself
how many questions do you recommend
doing a day at least 10
at least 10 new ones a day
yes at least 10 new questions a day
is where i think you should be at
like we said we say like this this
should be at least 10 hours outside of
class time a week right
so at least 10 hours of class time at
least 10 hours outside of class each
week means that if you were doing two
hours a day monday through friday that'd
be like a half an hour of banky half an
hour of code wars and an hour of getting
through the reading or the projects
right
some folks can do more some have to do a
little bit less everyone does have the
same privileges when it comes to time
code wars and anki takes me about an
hour a day yeah it's about right like
some folks will think a little bit more
sometimes it'll take a little bit less
but i think once you hit your once you
hit your rhythm you've been doing it for
a while that hour mark is um where it
starts to get
cool
can you hit us with some of that
motivation i'm thinking about dropping
out of 100 devs
all right
this might not be your moment that's
okay
it's okay
we'll always be here when the when the
time is right
we'll be here for you
but
you have a choice to make
you have a choice to make and now you
know the path ahead of you
you know the path ahead of you
right
you're you've come so far you've learned
so much
there's just a few more things you got
to do
right there's only a few more things you
got to do
you got to build a few projects you got
to do some anki you got to do some code
wars
you're in the home stretch whether you
see it or not you're in the home stretch
and so once you hit this home stretch
everyone has to make a decision
is this something you want for yourself
is this something you want for your
family is this something that you want
for your life
do you want a high paid high growth
career
do you want a career that has phenomenal
benefits
do you want a career
that is ranked one of the happiest year
after year after year
because if you do
then you want to drop
because you got a small army behind you
that wants to see you be successful
you got a small army here on twitch chat
on discord that if you ask questions you
will get help
when you're behind you can jump into
voice channels you can jump into mayan
wolves or rufio streams or fox's streams
to get help
you got a small community behind you
but at the end of the day
we can't make you want it
that's a decision you have to make
but what i need you to realize is that
you've come so far
imagine
think back
30 classes ago
when we were stressing about html
and then you crushed it
then we were stressing about css and you
crushed it and we were stressing about
functions and you crushed it
and across each of these classes yes
it's hard yes we might not be there
fully understanding everything but look
at the stuff you've been able to build
the things you've been able to do things
to be able to accomplish
and know that you're on the precipice of
being there like you're almost
done
and so why throw in the towel right now
that doesn't really make sense to me
it happens a lot and and i'm gonna say
this because it happens a lot right as
we get close to the end
and what i really think it is is that a
lot of folks don't feel they deserve the
success
i don't know what it is but that's what
i that's like my
if i had to guess
is that for some folks
when they get close to winning
when we get close to
getting the things that we dreamed about
the things that we want for ourselves
we rebel against that for some reason
when you can start to taste it just a
little bit
something clicks in our brain that
imposter syndrome gets even worse
and we start to self-sabotage
happens every single cohort i've ever
taught of students that are trying to
learn how to code
it's happened every single time folks
that i thought were doing phenomenally
well in program that i thought were
producing great work come to me and say
hey leon i don't think i i don't think
i'm getting it
i don't think i'm going to get a job and
they they leave at that point
and what they don't realize is that they
just climbed a big ass hill
and if they had just gone another few
feet they would have been at the top
and what i'm telling you all right now
you have all climbed a big ass hill
and you're so close to the top
right you've been trudging through the
trough of sorrow for so long
in these next few weeks you're going to
be feeling those squiggles of fall soap
right we it's it was all the
trophosaurus the thing i showed you from
the very beginning
we go through a long long long trough of
sorrow then we get a little wind oh
maybe i unders maybe i understand what
the back end is i don't know how to do
it yet but at least i understand it how
many people in this world
never know the difference between front
end and back and web development right
you're there
and so over the next few weeks you'll
start to get your first squiggle of of
false hope where you've you've learned
enough to start building stuff you've
been you've been prepping your
interviews
right
you're starting to get those squiggles
and that's that's honestly
one of the hardest parts of the journey
because you get this little high and
then you crash it there's a little high
and you crash you get this little high
and you crash
and then after you crash a few times
you start to realize that you're on the
upswing and then you get the
job and so
don't self sabotage you put in five
months of work
let's think about that you put in five
and you're gonna sabotage it when you
can see the finish line
it makes no sense
but
we all have a choice to make
and
what i hope you realize is that nobody
else can ever make that choice for you
and at the end of the day
do you want a job that is high paid
that is high growth meaning that for the
rest of your career your salary is going
to keep going up up and up where you
have amazing benefits
where you're happy where you can take
care of yourself your family your future
family
where you can feel proud about the work
that you do that you can build real
things that real people use to have that
satisfaction
is that something you want because if
it's something you want
you got to make the decision to say you
know what that's what i want and i'm
going to put in the work to get it
because i can tell you that there are
millions of other people that want the
same thing that you want but they don't
want to put in the work
or they don't have the privilege
of time coming together at this moment
for them to put in the work
and so if you have the privilege of the
time to put in to make this work don't
waste it
it's not an opportunity everyone gets
it's not an opportunity that should be
taken lightly it's something that if you
stick it out for another few weeks
another few months that'll change the
rest of your life
and you want to throw in the channel
makes no sense
it makes no sense
so you got to get the sillies out your
brain
you got to get the self-doubt you got to
get the imposter syndrome you got to
push that [__] way back in the back and
get rid of it because you're close to
something that is life-changing
and when you're close to something
that's life-changing
right
there is uh
i don't like to reference this moment
but uh
that denzel said this and i it stuck
with me it's in my brain i can't get it
out denzel washington said
when you're at your highest that's when
the devil comes knocking
right y'all are close
y'all are close you're getting there
the devil's going to come a knocking
things are going to start getting in
your way
life stuff's going to start getting in
things that you didn't think we're
getting are going to start getting in
your way and posture syndrome's going to
start getting in your way all these
little things are going to start getting
in your way and that's why we have these
wiggles of false hope
and so you put in all this work you put
in month after month of work you're too
close
you're too close to throw all that away
but i can't make you want it
if you want it
it's a time to put all that stuff behind
it's time to focus in on the things that
have to get done i'm telling you the
clear path of things that have to get
done
you have to do your anki you have to do
your code wars you have to do your
checklist
you have to do your banky right you you
have to do these things every day
it's a binary it's a yes or no you're
going to do it
and get the benefit of it or are you not
going to go back to the way that you
were
there's some boats and logs to be
carried not everyone's going to carry
them but the folks that do
are not carrying them alone
look at all these folks that are in
twitch chat right now
if you're here in twitch chat and you
will help somebody carry the boats and
logs just say i'm here to help just put
it so that the folks that are on the on
the press like that they're on that
decision yes or no just say i'm here to
help
let me pull this up
look at chat
now if you typed in i'm here to help
you got got because i got them asking
you to do something
i'm asking you today tomorrow this week
next week i need you to go on those help
channels
it's one thing for us to say it's
another thing for us to do it
and so there are some folks right now
that the devil's coming to knock and
there are some folks that are on that
that line where they got to make the yes
or no
and they're going to come ask for help
if you typed i'm here to help i expect
you to be on discord
this isn't self-taught this is community
taught
which means we're all going to be in
those help channels helping folks that
are stuck
so you got a decision
you can carry some boats and logs for a
few more weeks for another few months
get something that'll change your life
we can go back to the way you were
you can get off the roller coaster
but i'll tell you what
my inbox is full of students
that have said you know what leon i wish
i would have hung on
and they're starting over again
just see it through to the end you'll
see you'll surprise yourself
and when it seems the darkest when you
feel like things aren't going your way
the most
go on discord
and there are hundreds of folks that
just committed to helping you right now
literally hundreds of folks that just
said i'm here to help and so don't you
dare say there's not people that want to
help you because there's there's
hundreds of them here right now
you could start dming them right now on
twitch don't do that ask your questions
on discord in the help channels
and we got folks that are here to help
you
that's it
you got this you're going to do this as
a decision i hope you make the right
choice
cool
alrighty folks uh tonight
we have
uh some really important topics to get
through
and these more shark facts
these really important topics are really
covered well uh by two individuals
philip roberts and jake archibald um
jake archibald's video is kind of like
the video that every person
that writes node professionally like
must watch and philip roberts has a
really good video that like breaks down
the nitty gritty of
the event loop and the stuff that we're
gonna cover tonight it is actually your
homework to watch these two videos
that's how foundational right
right
that's how foundational they are to
being
an engineer that uses node
professionally right it's they're
definitely meaty there's a lot to them
right but these folks have really broken
down what i believe are some of the most
important concepts in a way that really
makes sense
and so some of the stuff i do later
today is heavily influenced from their
videos so you're going to see some stuff
that looks familiar and then when you
watch these videos they're going to go
deeper so it's part of your homework you
have to watch these two videos but i
also want to make it very very clear
that a lot of stuff that we're covering
tonight
i have
incorporated from the watching those
videos myself and it's really helped uh
it's really helped me build out the
slides and the things that we're going
to talk about tonight so all props to
philip and jake
it's really important that you watch
these videos
jake's talk is a banger i agree it's
probably one of my favorite favorite
videos
are we gonna learn restful apis exactly
yes we are
i got you
cool
all right let's back that back end up
but before we do that
before we back in this back end up
we uh
we got to talk a little bit more about
the javascript we learned last week so
i want to bring it back
i want to talk through uh the beginnings
of we talked about last class so that we
can lean into the deeper media topics i
had some slides that said like with the
buy felicia slides i had those but we're
going to bring those back and so to get
into those more meaty topics we want to
cover
the basics cool so
javascript is single
threaded meaning it is synchronous it
does one thing at a time
it is not a multi-threaded language
there are some multi-threaded languages
and the way i like to think about a
single threaded versus a multi-threaded
language is let's say
we
owned a paper company
and we wanted to deliver those papers we
could have a singular paper delivery
person
or we could have multiple paper delivery
persons the wonderful thing with
multiple delivery persons is that you
can deliver multiple papers at one time
but you might run into some more
problems single thread it might take a
little bit longer to deliver all those
papers but you could run into less comp
complications and what we're going to
see over the next few classes is that
single threaded actually winds up being
one of our most beneficial things that
makes node fast that makes it a
wonderful language to use and so we're
going to lean into this idea of being
being single threaded and the advantages
that it can bring
cool
um
if javascript is single threaded
if it is synchronous meaning we do one
thing after another
how do we do stuff
like make an api request and keep
scrolling on the page how do we like
something and keep moving through other
posts like how are we doing all this
stuff that's gonna take some time
for it to resolve and how are we not
just stuck there waiting for it
ah because of the environment exactly
in javascript things should block like
all those tasks could have to wait until
the first one finishes and then move on
to the next one what up bro right so we
we we we normally
would have to
wait
right we have to normally sit there and
be blocked
but since we are running javascript in
the environment
we get access to the ability to hand off
all of those tasks all those
asynchronous tasks we have the ability
to hand them off
based on the environment in which we are
running javascript so when i talk about
the environment i'm not talking about
this i'm talking about this look at that
and it's glory
it's glory that's what i'm talking about
we're running our javascript
in the browser right when i'm talking
about the environment right now i'm
talking about running my javascript in
the browser eventually we'll run our
javascript in another environment but
the first environment the environment
that we've been running our code in all
this time
was the browser
okay
since our
javascript
is running in the browser we get access
to a bunch of what chat since our
javascript is running in the browser we
get access to a bunch of what
yeah
we get access to a bunch of web
apis remember
the browsers come bundled with all of
this technology
and our javascript gets access to it
since it's running in the browser so
just simply by running our javascript in
the browser we get access to all these
other goodies that javascript itself
would never have like built into the
actual language so a lot of this stuff
that's asynchronous that would normally
be blocking behavior in javascript
javascript's not actually handling it's
handing off all these blocking things to
the web apis that can go ahead and do
them on our behalf
and tonight
what we're going to learn
is how that is actually happening
underneath the hood like what's
happening like how are we doing this
handoff how is javascript which is a
synchronous blocking language how are we
able to do all these async stuff that's
we're gonna get to tonight
this realization makes the appreciate
browsers more it really does these
browsers do a lot of work
a lot of heavy lifting and do it and
enable us to do a lot of things we
wouldn't be able to do before
uh durva said i read an article today
talking about apple's stubborn refusal
to improve safari's web apis on ios
devices to force apps on the app store
to run more smoothly so they can keep
getting their 35
cut
so i i haven't read that
but let's talk about let's let's say if
that was true
right if that was true let's let's talk
about that because that's a really
interesting thing
[Music]
when you're running a browser on an ios
device
you are
using
you are using safari
even if you're using chrome even if
you're using
um
firefox they are all skinned safari
right like they they like you're like
it's not the same
right it's pretty interesting
it's just safari underneath the hood
and so safari is exposing certain web
apis and since apple has control
over what web apis it provides right
what web apis it provides
in its browser we could see that maybe
the browser isn't keeping pace with the
web standard now i'm not saying that's
what's happening i think this is an
interesting thought experiment
since since we are
in a walled garden right
right and since the browsers get to
choose which apis are exposed there
could be a scenario where apple says you
know what let's not expose these apis in
the browser so that folks have to
continue to build mobile apps that get
access to those features right we could
live in a world
where safari gave us access to
everything like the gyroscope the camera
system
um
like all these things that the phone has
access to
you could make safari have access to all
of that stuff right like there's a way
to build
into the web apis
access to all that stuff
right
and so maybe there is a scenario where
that's not happening so that you have to
build mobile apps that get access to
that stuff now like i said i have no
idea if this is true or not i have no
idea if like that's what's actually
happening i just think it's an
interesting thought experiment because
now we understand
that javascript is running in the
browser and javascript only has access
to what the browser provides via the web
apis
right i don't think this is a reason to
dislike apple i think it's just an
interesting thing to think through
right
it's a very interesting thing to think
through
right this idea right there's this idea
that the browsers and let's not lay it
all just on on apple's foot the browsers
like chrome
like safari like firefox they all have a
responsibility
to keep up with a web standard and if we
go back in the day
they didn't they didn't all play well
together we had um netscape navigator
then we had
um ie
and then ie and netscape navigator
weren't playing nice to each other and
so firefox came on the scene and was
like hey whoa whoa i'm gonna fix all
these things right and then we had the
browser wars and it wasn't until like 10
years later
right
it wasn't until like 10 years later
that they all decided to start playing
nice to each other and it wasn't really
until like 2015
when we really got all the goodies
starting to come through on a regular
basis
uh so the web is still a new thing right
and we're starting to understand maybe
why because well each browser is
different
each browser really could
expose their own apis that are different
from the other browsers and so what
could have wound up happening is that we
could write javascript but when you
start to run it in the different
browsers it might not have access to all
the same things and so we talked about
something that we used to use in the
past that helped us write javascript
once and have it work on all the
different browsers what was that thing
that we used to use back in the day
shout out sorry to hear that we're here
when you come back
take
care we used to use jquery jquery
enabled us to write javascript and then
jquery did all the heavy lifting to make
it work in all the different browsers
that might have been exposing all
different
apis
right but now all the browsers are
playing nice with each other
right
right now all the browsers are playing
nice to each other so we don't really
need jquery anymore because that cross
browser compatibility that it brought to
the table it's just really not something
that we need at the moment
cool
my first website i ever built was a
netscape navigator
yeah netscape navigator had a like tool
to build websites
and i remember like in the library
using netscape to build my first website
yeah
you know i've been around the block
geocities is where i hosted my dragon
ball z
rp group
we used to play on aim there used to be
aim chat rooms with a roll dice command
and we used to play dragon ball z like
role playing games based on the role of
dice and like that's how you know like
if you want to fight or not
and around the block folks
all right
now
we're starting to learn all this stuff
we keep talking about this thing called
browser apis
and when you look at the list of browser
apis you see that one of the things
that's on this list of apis that come
with the browser is something called the
dom
and i just remember the first time i
learned this
my mind just exploded
that javascript
does not actually come
with the dom or access to the dom
access to the dom is provided
via a web api
that comes
with the browser
so whenever you did
document.queryselector
that wasn't javascript
right
that was a web api that javascript had
access to
because our javascript was running where
in the browser
the reason we had access to the dom and
query selector query selector all of
those things was not because it came
with javascript but because we were
running our javascript in the browser
which exposes all these apis that we can
use
but it's not actually part of javascript
now interesting enough is what we call
this like document.queryselector
uh if if if the dom is an api
what is the document.queryselector here
oh there's a word that i might call this
i'm gonna use i'm going to i can use it
very loosely here
a very very loose word here but i could
use it
it is a method
that is correct
but
we access what is an api what is an api
let's step back let's think about what
an api is
yeah
it's a simple
interface
to do something complex
so manipulating the dom
is the very complex thing that we are
doing
that makes the
document.queryselector technically are
what
our interface right
it's the interface
it's the simple thing that we can use
that does a lot of complex stuff think
we just do document.queryselector
and it knows how to go into the dom
grab stuff from the dom it's doing all
these complex actions because we use
that interface same thing like a remote
on a remote control
right think about like a remote and
remote control you press a button that
button is the interface that does
something complex in your tv
lang said this is so great paid for a
boot camp didn't learn any of this i'm
telling you folks always coming out of
boot camps you don't have to listen to
me i tell this stuff to you all the time
listen to folks in chat i'm telling you
you're running circles around folks
coming out of these other boot camps
they don't learn this stuff
i know i know people that are writing
javascript professionally that don't
know this stuff
but it does help you as we go deeper and
deeper and know to really understand
what's happening underneath the hood
oh
all right
so
all that stuff that we were worried
about we know that javascript is a
synchronous language it does one thing
after another it should block
all the stuff that
we would consider blocking we can do
because javascript
is handing off all that asynchronous
stuff
all that stuff that would take time and
would normally block in a single
threaded language we're handing all that
stuff off to web apis and web apis can
do that asynchronously
with javascript hands that off to the
browser the browser does its thing
right the browser does its thing
and then once it's done it responds
back to javascript so we can use it and
keep on moving so tonight we're actually
going to see how that happens how we
hand that stuff off to the browser
right and come back
cool
because if we're handing off all this
stuff to the browser we need to handle
how it comes back
and we first originally handled all
these things coming back with what we
would hand off stuff the web apis and
then when when those were done we could
we could do the next thing by using what
or the ways that we handled the
responses back from the web apis yeah we
used to call we used to use callbacks
but uh callbacks led to what
callbacks led to what
hell exactly they they they led to
they led to call back hell which we'll
see again tonight
and so
with
ecmascript 2015
we had a promise
for a new future
right where we brought in promises
and promises were just an object that
could have a value in the future and
they came with some methods like the
then methods or the catch methods so
once the promise did have a value or it
resolved the then's methods would fire
and
if there were any errors the catch
method would fire
and then we were like all right these
promises are great
but they don't read too well they kind
of there's like this chaining syntax
that's going on and so with ecmascript
we added some syntactical sugar on the
top and that was async await so we're
going to see those again tonight we're
going to see that progression tonight
but i i used a big word
called ecmascript
what is ecmascript
yeah
so javascript
is an
implementation i'm using these words
loosely here for for
educational sake right
javascript is an implementation
of a standard or a specification
and so when we keep talking about
javascript updating it's really not
javascript that's updating necessarily
i can feel the nerds shaking
it's ecmascript that is updating
and ecmascript has a council that
approves what changes occur and so in
2015 we had a lot of really big changes
and these big changes brought things
like const and let all these wonderful
things we've been using throughout the
entire program together
right
and all those big foundational changes
we called
es6 or ecmascript 2016. so everything
from 2015 2016 that
the standards body agreed on right
that
then right that then
i'm gonna
timeout although before anybody answers
that
uh
all those things that we got all those
goodies that we got
right
all those goodies that we got
were part of the
standard or the specification that was
ecmascript of which javascript is just
an implementation of
and so in 2016 we got all these goodies
and we called that es6
right so that was all the big changes
that happened in 2015 that happened in
in
in 2016
right
and then the standard kept improving and
so we got async await when does anybody
know when we got async await
equiscript what
yeah es8 or es or ecmascript 2018 is
when we got the async await
specification and so
that got bundled into javascript as we
know it now so
javascript which is an implementation of
the standard equiscript keeps getting
updated to give us all these wonderful
things and so when we come back from
break we're going to see what we used to
have to struggle with which were
callbacks we're going to see that
progression into promises and the newer
async awaits syntax and then once we
feel good about those things again we're
going to get got and when we get got
we're going to understand how to not get
got and go get
by understanding the event loop and how
javascript is actually passing off all
this asynchronous stuff to the browser
so we can do the things that we want to
do but for now we're going to take a
break
around here where they take a
at break
top of every hour
if you're able please get up move around
hydrate look at something that's not the
screen let your eyes relax and remember
we're going a little fast through this
stuff if you if you missed last class
we're kind of just reviewing everything
we spent the whole class on last time so
uh make sure you go back to youtube
exclamation point youtube you can watch
that full class get that all in if you
have questions
hundreds of folks said that they're
willing to help you and they're gonna be
on discord to help you so after class
jump on discord ask your questions come
to office hours with them five minutes
on the clock see you all very soon yo if
you have glasses clean them
just saying
when i clean my i just cleaned my
glasses
a different world
all right
got the dishes done all right seven
minutes y'all here
alrighty so
we want to jump through
callbacks promises async awaits so we
can get to underneath the hood what's
actually happening
and um someone brought up a really good
question right as we took a break
and the question was like why do we need
to know
why do we need to know that javascript
doesn't do this and that it's the web
apis that are doing it
and my answer is
so we can destroy the competition
so that we can be beast
when it comes to the technical interview
so we can go further than anyone has
gone before so that we can destroy
those which need to be destroyed
we want to be better than everyone else
we really do
that's it that's the reason so many
folks coming out of boot camp so many
folks coming out of cs programs have no
idea that this stuff is even existing or
understands what it is
and so when we understand it now does it
help us when it comes to interviewing
how does it come time to help us
but it gives us this understanding
that makes you think differently about
your code going into the future
once you understand that this stuff
doesn't come with javascript that it's
the web api that gives it access to it
then we start writing node you're going
to be like wait a minute
node doesn't have web apis what does it
have
right and what is javascript accessing
when we run it in node are there other
places that we could run our node and
once we understand how the event loop
runs then maybe we could write more
performant javascript and so there's a
lot of stuff that if you have this
like this fundamental understanding
right if you have this fundamental
understanding
it helps you think differently for the
rest of your your development career
when you're using node
and it also introduces some really
important concepts
right it introduces things like stacks
and cues which are fundamental data
structures that we're going to use
especially when we get to interviewing
and so
i don't like to introduce stacks and
cues and some like
here's the algorithm data structures you
need to pass the interview way i want to
show you how stacks and cues are used in
real life every single day so you have a
real understanding of this stuff
some folks will spend a whole semester
learning data structures and algorithms
but have no idea like how to apply them
or where they actually come up
right and to me i think that's kind of a
shame and so
i really like this topic because it
helps you really critically think about
what's happening in the browser what's
happening in node and then also like you
start to see some of the really
fundamental data structures and then
even some algorithms we'll see next week
that we're going to use throughout the
rest of your time as a software engineer
yeah no worries daisy so yeah
other than like destroying our enemies
this is this is that's why
i actually think it's fun i think it's
cool to like know that how this stuff
works
all right
next let's keep pushing here
all right so we talked about this idea
that all this stuff is being handed off
to the web apis and eventually they have
to respond and so the way we did this
before
uh was with callbacks but to understand
callbacks you have to understand
something fundamental before callbacks
right so we have to understand that in
javascript a function can take another
function as an argument
when you have a function that takes
another function as an argument
what is that parent function called
yeah it's a higher order function
exactly
and you have seen this a bazillion times
every single time you've used an event
listener and you've created a click
event you have created a higher order
function so here we have add event
listener
it's a function
uh we see that takes in click and it
also takes in a function
as an argument
what the heck do we call the function
that's passed in as an argument if you
have a higher order function a function
that takes in a function what do you
call the function that's being taken in
yeah we call that function a callback
and so we've seen this a bazillion times
ad event listener would be the higher
order function and whatever function
runs based on the click would be your
callback
now
callback is the thing that callback is
the function that's passed in as an
argument but it's not really a thing in
javascript there's no like thing in the
specification called a callback it's
really just a convention uh and it's
something that we use to like really
help us when it comes to writing
javascript
because a callback can fire once an
asynchronous task is done
right
once an asynchronous task is done
we can use the callback to be fired
after and before we got to promises and
before we got to async await we needed
callbacks so there'd be no way for us to
handle
all this asynchronous stuff that was
happening in the browser without
callbacks javascript would choo-choo
chew along it wouldn't wait for anything
and we wouldn't be able to build the
applications that we know and love so
callbacks were the original way that
something asynchronous could happen and
then the next thing would happen after
it
so here
is a mess of callbacks
we have a set timeout
and then once the set timeout is done
it'll console log and then we have
another set timeout and when that is
done it'll console log and we have
another set timeout when that is done
it'll console log and so this nested
list of callbacks
we refer to as the pyramid of doom or
call back hell
right and so to avoid call back hell
we were given a promise
of a better future
right what if there was a way to more
a more readable way to handle
asynchronous code instead of nesting our
crap inside of other crap what if there
was a way
that we could
have a more readable way to handle
asynchronous code and that's where
promises came into the game
now people lose their minds when they
hear about a promise
right
all a promise is
is an object
and it's an object
that can have a value
at some time in the future
you got to think about the promises
having three states
pending
fulfilled
and rejected
and if the promise is fulfilled and it's
done resolving
it has some methods that can fire
so once the once the once the promise
has a value and it's resolved
the then methods all start firing they
kind of just fire one after another
and if something was to go wrong what
method would fire instead of the dens
it's an iou yeah you could think of it
as an iou i like that idea
a catch would fire so promise is an
object that can have a value
once that value resolves all the then
start firing if something was to
happen or go wrong then the catch would
fire instead
cool
we've seen this before
we've seen this before it's not
something that's new it's not something
that should shake us to our core
we've seen it with fetch all the time
fetch is a what
fetches of what
it's a web api
it's a web api now when i say web api
what the heck do i mean i keep saying
web api wait would be i keep saying web
api web api web api web api web api what
the heck do i mean by web api
hey does this work web api web api web
api web api
what do i mean
yeah something that the browser is
giving us right
we have a simple interface
that enables us to do something really
complex and the browser is handling it
for us so fetch
is our really simple interface to do
something really complex that the
browser is handling like going and
getting that information right going and
getting that information is something
the browser is handling for us
and most of our web apis respond with a
what
most of our web apis respond with a what
a promise yeah they respond with a
promise
right and that promise
may have a value
and once that promise resolves
right once that promise resolves
and it has that value what fires
what fires
the thens exactly and so that's why
these dens run after we hear back from
the api like once we hear back from the
dog ceo api these dens fire because
it's not something about the api what it
is is that
the fetch is a web api that is giving us
a promise
when that promise resolves
boom then fires then boom the next then
fires and if something was to go wrong
then we would skip the events and go
straight to the catch
what's something that could go wrong
with
our fetch
what's something that could go wrong
with our with our fetch
yeah we get a 404 like maybe the api is
down
maybe it doesn't exist maybe we typed in
the wrong url there's so many things
that can go wrong when you're making a
request to another server and so if any
of those things went wrong well then our
catch could fire
and our catch would handle that error
and we would console log and see the
error
not authenticated yeah a bunch of stuff
that could happen all right so fetch
returns a promise
just like a bunch of other web apis that
are running asynchronous code this is
really key for us to remember later on
fetch is a web api web apis probably
return a promise why why do you think
web apis return promises
we're not there yet but i think it's an
interesting question that just think
about for a quick second and then we're
gonna see it later on
yeah
it takes time right all these all these
web apis all this asynchronous stuff
takes time but javascript can't wait to
long for that javascript wants a promise
of some data in the future
right and so the webbie provides just
give it a promise and that promise
eventually has
some value
so javascript can keep on trucking
javascript is a synchronous single
threaded language it waits for no one it
just keeps moving
it's impatient exactly
all right
we looked at some wild code here
um and this code looks a little heavy at
first but what we're seeing here is that
each one of these functions returns a
what
each one of my functions here is
returning a what
yeah each one of my functions here is
returning a promise
and so when i call house one
this promise will resolve
and once it resolves what's gonna happen
we have the set time it's gonna take a
second
but once it's done it's gonna resolve
and what's gonna what's gonna happen as
soon as the house won we called it as a
function call but it returns a promise
that promise resolves what happens
right all the then start firing one
after another the the promise chain
starts going off right then then then
then then then then then then then then
then then then then then then then hey
does this work then then then then then
then web api web api
then then does this work all right all
right so we have this
we have
this web api
right or sorry in this case the promise
that resolves as soon as the promise
resolves
the then start firing
right
and so we can see inside one of the
thens
house 2 would run which also returns a
promise which would also resolve and
then the then the then the then then the
then the then the then
right
that's it
we see all these dents this chained
and running one after another and so
this works right this is a this is a
decent way of handling
promises
we use this for a while but
it don't read too good
how does reject fit into this well if
it's rejected
the cash would fire
so if any point in time our promise
our promise was rejected
and didn't resolve to be fulfilled
then the catch would fire
but the then's all fired because all of
our promises resolved because we
literally told them to resolve right
look we told them all to resolve
there's really not a way that this would
um
not resolve so all of our thens keep
firing and that's fine
it's just that it don't read too good
like it doesn't look like javascript
that we would normally write
like we just have all these chains it's
kind of messy it's not really easy to
read it's going to get increasingly
harder and harder to see what's
happening
inside of this like these promise chains
and we're kind of back we're not back at
call back hell
but we're in a thing that's just not
like doesn't feel good it doesn't feel
like regular javascript and so
a lot of folks said hey
i want my asynchronous code to look
synchronous and i want it now
right they started to complain a little
bit like hey you gave us a promise of a
better future
right but it don't read too good
right i want it to look synchronous
javascript is a synchronous language and
i want it to look like the rest of my
code
and so we got async await
with es8 or ecmascript 2018
we got async await
877 code now
hold on i'll give it i'm giving them vip
uh how can i just vip you like this
i was gonna copy here dave
there you go you got vip
that made me laugh way too loud if you
make me laugh off the charts you get vip
there you go
we get vip for being funny exactly juice
box get in here give me a comment give
me the one liners i need them easy easy
vip
oh that was hilarious uh what if you
don't know what that why i'm laughing
it's a rip on uh a commercial a jg
wentworth commercial
it's my money and i want it now
oh boy all right so they wanted
they wanted their asynchronous code they
wanted it now
they
wanted a syntax that looked a little bit
more synchronous and so
we had a new way of handling these async
responses
but underneath the hood
boomer jokes
i don't know what i told you but uh
boomer jokes exactly um
this async await that we got with es8
was just promises underneath the hood it
was just a little a little syntactical
sugar that we were putting on top of our
promises
it's almost like javascript is written
in like 10 days and we have to keep
making it better
we have to like keep
like putting sugar on it to make it
palatable
right uh
i don't know it just seems a little
weird right
and so
we put this little syntactical sugar
it's just promises underneath the hood
but
oh baby
uh we have this wonderful await syntax
and a wait waits for any async process
to be complete as long as it is inside
of an async function
and here we go we have our normal
functions that have the promises
but then inside of it look at this sweet
mama jama look at this
oh
rinse i have an async function and we're
just awaiting each thing
look at that damn
[Music]
it looks
like the synchronous code that we know
and love when writing javascript
but it's handling all these async tasks
oh
cause we're inside of an async function
we're awaiting and so this asynchronous
thing can go off it can do its thing the
promise will resolve
and then whatever that value from the
promise resolving is now stored in house
one weight and then we await whatever
came back from house two that that
promise resolves whatever value the
promise had is now in house two weight
same thing with house three and we can
just console log them like normal and it
look
[Music]
passion said wow this is hot it is
this is some hot code right here
i wish all my code could be look like
this
it's purdy right
from from from but you got to think
about it like the build up right we
gotta think about the build up
from
from this hot mess
imagine if this was real code
right like where you actually like your
job is to like get in the code and
figure out what's going on and you see
this
you know like the simpsons meme
where like home like homer's dad like
walks in puts the hat on sees that
bart's at the desk and turns around and
walks back out
that would be me in this code base right
you would walk in see it nope i'm out i
quit take your money back here you go
right forget the dental plan
all right so we went from this which
would just be a hot hot garbage mess
literally call back hell
we built up
to a promise for a better future right
like this promise chain like that that's
okay right like
it reads okay but it's still kind of
messy like we got to like see what's
going on inside of these
to this
to this hot piece of code
you know i didn't feel like a boomer
until i started saying well back in my
day we wrote callbacks
right
back in my day we wrote call back that's
when that's when i knew i was getting
old
back in my day we didn't have any of
this fancy dancy async awaits stuff
you know what we had to do
back in my day then then then then then
then and then we would ask ourselves hey
does this work and then we then then
then then then then then right like like
you gen zeros these days get all this
good
clean async await code you don't know
the pain
i saved you from the pain
the ecmascript council has saved you
from the pain
you'll never know
all right
now this is all fine and dandy
thank you c sharp exactly
uh i need something real like where when
would i actually use this right
sorry sorry this is a wendy's uh when
when would we actually use this right
well
here's a here's an api request
and it just looks so good
right it makes it so good does syntactic
sugar make our code more slow no because
it still promises underneath the hood
it's just a little bit different syntax
but it's still using promises underneath
the hood
right
all right so here we we're inside of an
async function
and so we can await the fetch
the fetch will return a promise
and then the result of that promise the
value that that promise has will be
stored in res
and then we can await
that lovely jsonification of whatever
came back
and then we can actually just
console.log whatever came back from that
await right so we we have this what was
normally
a a fetch with
promise chains
we've turned into a beautiful async
function now i asked you for homework uh
this async is is missing something
it's missing how we handle errors so we
need a try and a catch block it works
without the try and catch but right now
we're not catching any errors so part of
your homework before sunday i need you
to come back to this code and try out
try and catch blocks and you're like
leon i have no idea how to use trying
catches where could you go to see the
syntax and they try and catch blocks
mdn
exactly
mdn let's go
cool
so
before we get into the event loop i want
to use a web api like set time out
uh this
let's use a web api like set timeout
set timeout
and set interval
are not part of the javascript or the
ecmascript specification
if we go and look at the ecmascript
specification
we will not see set timeout
we will not see set interval therefore
they are not actually part of javascript
however
most environments
give us access to them like all the
browsers node.js they all give you
access to set timeouts at interval and
it makes a lot of sense
why can't javascript have set timeout
built in
yeah it's single threaded it's
synchronous it literally can't wait it
can't wait for the set timeout to finish
it has to choo choo keep moving right it
can't it's single threaded it literally
can't exist now here's an interesting
thing
let's see if we're if we're pro gamers
or not
set timeout
in the browser
is a web api
right so timeout you're with me hold on
come with me get in
we're getting close
set timeout in the browser
is a web api
when we get to node
is set timeout still a web api
can't be because we're not in a freaking
browser anymore so literally the set
timeouts we're using
are different in the browser and they're
different in node because javascript
doesn't have set timeout it's something
that's being given to us by the
environment that we're running
javascript in what the [__] is going on
they're not the same
they're built different they're
literally
built a different
now i'm using set timeout as an example
here
but there are a lot of other things that
aren't necessarily set timeout
where one's going to be a web api and
the others are going to be c and c plus
plus apis
so where we have the browser to handle
this stuff
node has
its environment that gives us access to
c and c plus plus stuff so wire one went
me a web api
the other might actually be apis that
are coming from c and c plus plus
right and now there's some crossover
right we are still using the v8 engine
we're still using a lot of the same
stuff underneath the hood but we don't
have access to the browser which is
literally a program running on our
computer so we don't get access to some
stuff
and we run it in node we don't get
access to some stuff they're different
environments
right they're different environments
all right
here's some code that i definitely i
want to run this code so let me go ahead
and i'm just going to i'm going to open
this in the starter code if you don't
have the starter code it's the same
starter code as last class but if you
need the code to follow along you can
join our discord exclamation point
discord
agree to the rules and when you join
you'll see a follow material shout out
has all the materials how many people we
have on discord right now
nine hundred people
we're almost at thirty three thousand
people on discord that's wild
thirty two thousand nine hundred
let's go
all right
i actually want to type this one out i
will not type it i just want to run it
and so
this is one that has the set timeout so
let's go ahead and take a look at that
all right here we go
i'm gonna uncomment
this i am going to
open it in the browser
one second
all right gonna open up my inspector
going to go to my console and let's take
a look at this
so
here we have function1 which is the
normal console log
this is the async practice folder you're
not coding anything it's just if you
wanted to run the code in your own
browser you could
but you could probably get the same
thing just following along
cool
now we have
function house 2
which has a set timeout of 3 seconds
and then we have a function of house
three
that has a console log
right
cool
all right
so if we look at this we would expect
javascript is going to
one then house two then house three we
know javascript's a single thread it
doesn't wait so we would expect house
one to run
and we would see
the paper delivered to house one in the
console
then we know that this one would take
three seconds so that's gonna have to go
do its own thing
javascript's not gonna wait
we're gonna have three three house three
and then eventually this is done
and we would see house two and when we
run it
that's exactly what we see
we say paper delivered to house one then
house three and then house two
and it's like all right well that makes
sense because there was
a three second delay
right there was a three second delay so
it makes sense that it went one three
two
but when we get rid of this delay
and we save this
and we run it there's no delay the the
first time we had the three second delay
so that made sense we did
one
three then two
because this two is taking three seconds
right
why is three thousand three seconds
because it's milliseconds
so three thousand is three seconds and
so let's just go ahead and and make this
zero seconds so no delay
by today
right no delay by today we would expect
one two three to happen there's no delay
by today no delay right but
when we save this
and we run it in the browser
we still get the same thing
one
three
two
now why is it still one three two it's
it's zero there's no delay by today
why does it just run it
and have it one two three
we changed it to zero
there should be no delay we should be
able to buy it today
well
we got gap
y'all came to get and we got got by the
event loop
right we got got
tag your jabroni friends on discord you
got got
right
we got got
because set timeout
is a web
api right
set timeout is a web api which means it
has to be handed off
to the browser
right has to be handed off to the
browser which takes
time
even though there was no delay it still
had to be handed off to the browser so
we couldn't buy today and we got got
by the event loop
so
we need to learn a few data structures
so that we can write this wrong and not
get got in the future all right we need
to learn some data structures
once we learn two data structures we're
going to be able to see the event loop
underneath the hood
and not get got
so let's look at some data structures
there are two really found like
fundamental data structures
um
that are very easy to implement in
javascript that show up throughout your
programming career
and they form
the two really important pieces
right they form two really important
pieces
that show up over and over again when
you're trying to understand how
javascript is running in the browser and
then how it's eventually running in node
so the first data structure is a queue
and you can think of a cue just like a
fancy word for a line right you get into
the queue if you're from the uk you
queue you don't stand in line right eq
and so you get into a queue and if
you're the first person into the queue
you are the first out right you're
trying to buy movie tickets
you get into the line and if you're
first in line you're the first to get
the tickets
so a queue we call a first in
first out data structure the first
person into the line or the first person
into the queue is the first out
i also like to think of it as frisbees
so let's say uh you are all we're all
playing frisbee together we have lots of
frisbees going and uh
so i just type frisbee type frisbee in
chat so i can see some people here
all right
beautiful all right so so
all right this is
minty threw a frisbee reesey threw a
frisbee and garrett threw a frisbee so
minty threw a frisbee and i put it on my
plate
right
reese threw a frisbee i put it on my
plate
and then
garrett threw the frisbee and it went on
my plate so i have all these frisbees
that are now
i'm holding all these frisbees
right holding all these frisbees and
when i go to throw the frisbees i'm
gonna throw from the bottom right i'm
gonna throw from the bottom
right so the first frisbee into the
queue
is the first frisbee out because that's
what i'm gonna grab and throw
all right so i like to think of frisbees
frisbees are coming in i'm grabbing the
bottom frisbee and throwing them back
out you could also think of it as like a
line the first person into the line is
the first person out and that is a q
now in javascript it is pretty easy
right
so the opposite of a stack and and magic
the gathering yeah sort of if you if
you've played magic you know what a
stack is we're going to get to that in a
second cool
so now we can implement a cube pretty
easily in javascript if we use an array
and so here we have push
and so i have my queue that i've
declared using literal notation to
create the array
and i went ahead and i pushed
the number two
into
the queue
then i went ahead and i pushed the
number five
into
my q
and so if we're to look at the queue now
we would see 2
and 5
and then i shift
which means i'm pulling the first value
off of the queue
and i'm alerting that value so this
queue here is an example of a first in
first out data structure or a queue
where the things were pushed into the
array the numbers were pushed into the
array and then we shifted off those
numbers so the first in
was the first out
cool
first try
alrighty
oh boy dogs are in the house i see you
all right now the next data structure
the mtg players want to channel hey if
you all started using the game together
maybe
game blouses exactly
all right now
here we have a stack
when i think of a stack
i think of pancakes
right
when you're making pancakes
you put a pancake onto a stack
and what happens unless you're a monster
is you keep putting pancakes on the
stack
and then as you go to serve the pancakes
to your friends and family
right
the last pancake on the stack
is the first one out
so you're making pancakes you keep
flopping pancakes higher and higher on
the stack
and the last pancake you put on the
stack is the first pancake off
right so where as the q is first in
first out a stack is last in
first out so you have a stack of
pancakes
you're putting more and more and more on
the stack you're not gonna pull the
pancake at the bottom to get it out no
your whole stack of delicious pancakes
would go everywhere your family would
hate you right so unless you're a
monster pancakes are stacks right you
keep putting pancakes higher and higher
on the stack and the last pancake in the
stack is the first pancake off and so we
just take our pancakes off off off
all the way down to the bottom of the
stack so q
is what kind
of structure
q
is what kind of structure
give me the the name for it
fifo exactly
first in
first out you're the first in the line
you're the first out of the line
a stack is what kind of data structure
give me the give me the name for it
leafo exactly
last in
first out meaning the last pancake on
the stack is the first pancake off the
stack
beautiful
now
here's a stack example using javascript
once again we're going to use an array
and so we push
our 2 into the array we push our 5 into
the array and now we have 2 and 5 in the
array and instead of shifting which
would be a q
we pop
which means the last thing that was on
the array
is the first thing out so since the five
was the last thing into the array it is
the first thing out and so we'd wind up
alerting five and the stack would be
left with just
two cool
so we have our lovely
q which is a first in
first out
and we have our stack
which is a last in
first out and we're going to need
both of these
right we're going to need both of these
these
cues and stacks to stop us
from getting got
all right we need the power
of cues
and we need the power of stacks
to not get got
so
we're gonna take our break we're gonna
put five minutes on the clock
we had a couple hydrates come in here
thank you for the hydrations let's see
here
wisconsin hey thank you for hydration
cheers to you linda shrews hey cheers to
you thank you for the hydration
we're gonna take a break
and when we come back
we're gonna put our cues
and our stacks
into practice to stop us from getting
got all right folks five minutes on the
clock if you're able uh please get up
move around hydrate
you got got so let's talk about not
getting got
let's talk about not getting got
so we talked about this idea of a
little bit this idea of a first in first
out
which is a q
and we talked about this last in
lashed out
right this last in
last out
sorry last in first out
so this first and first out and last out
last in first out so a fifo and a lifo a
q and a stack
right a q and a stack
right
a q and a stack
and we want to implement these cues and
stacks in ways that help us not get got
and so
what we have to realize
is that javascript is running in
the browser
and since
javascript right
since javascript is running in the
browser we get access to a few things
first we get access to something called
the v8 engine
remember our
javascript is not something
that the computer understands
right our javascript is not something
the computer understands and so it has
to be broken down from the javascript
that's human readable to us into
something that the computer can actually
understand so the v8 engine comes with a
couple bits and pieces folks that come
from like a more computer sciency
background might initially think of the
v8 engine as a what
could have had a v8 exactly
yeah similar to like a compiler right uh
something that's going to take your code
and break it down to something that the
computer can understand
compiler interpreter we'll eventually
figure out all these distinctions
but the va engine is a little bit more
than just that compiler it also has
things like memory management and
garbage collecting stuff that a language
like javascript really doesn't have
natively and so we get all that stuff by
running our javascript in the browser
which gives it access to the v8 engine
and when you have the v8 engine you have
all these goodies that make it like a
good environment to run your javascript
in
so
not only do when we're running it in the
browser we get access to the v8 engine
in the compilation the memory management
the garbage collecting
we also get access to all these web apis
and the ability to pass stuff off to
really meaty programs or really meaty
sets of tools like lib event
right and so lib event is the
cornerstone of the event loop in the
browser
lib event is actually different than lib
lib is what helps us have the event loop
in
node but in the browser we have lib
event and i always feel that you can
tell
how serious a tool is
by uh looking at its
it's it's it's website should we install
lib event no we don't have to because we
get access to it by it being in the
browser so here's lib events website
yeah they got this one
there's some nerd stuff exactly though
they got this one
you on one all right on one
you do you
thanks
thank you mm-hmm all right
all right so
we get the past stuff the lib event
which does all the heavy lifting for us
right
as developers we're really think i'm
really thankful that i don't have to
worry about this stuff
right that i can just hand this off to
this battle test it live event which
will handle kind of how will handle the
event loop when i'm running my
javascript in the browser
that we get access to all these
wonderful web apis that my javascript
runs in the browser it gives it access
to the v8 engine which enables my code
to
to have to be compiled to have memory
management to have garbage collection
like we get all this stuff
just by running javascript in the
browser
right
and so
we have to understand like how this is
actually working and what's actually
happening when we run javascript in the
browser and then we're going to see that
something very similar happens when we
run javascript in node and so
we have something called the event loop
and the event loop monitors the callback
queue and the job queue
and decides what needs to be pushed onto
the call stack now i'm using a lot of
big words here i don't mean them as
disrespect but we now know what cues and
stacks are and i'm going to show you how
they play out when we run our javascript
in the browser
right the event loop monitors the
callback and job queue and determines
what the size decides what needs to be
put on the call stack so we're gonna put
stuff on a stack and we have cues and we
have this loop what the heck does all
that mean
let's talk about it so
first and foremost i want to just say
again philip roberts has a beautiful
representation of this in the video
there's a sign for your homework this is
a simplification of their work so if you
want to see in much more detail you have
to watch philip robert's video in fact
you have to it's part of homework but
know that this idea and this concept
comes from them and how they broke it
down and i'm using our past example with
the console log
in combination so
when it comes time
to executing our javascript we know that
our javascript is single
threaded right it's single threaded and
we're going to treat this single thread
right now by using something called the
call
stack
we are going to put stuff onto the stack
and when we put stuff onto the stack
the stack is what kind of data structure
last in first out so the last thing on
the stack
is going to be the first thing out of
all right so when we run a program in
the browser when we run our javascript
in the browser there's always this main
and this main tells our javascript
to run
and then once this starts running we're
going to have an event loop
that comes by the way of lib event that
runs consistently so it'll loop
and then it'll loop
and then it'll loop and it'll keep going
and so give me a little bit of room here
a little bit of flexibility this isn't
100 what's happening but it's meant for
demonstration so our javascript has been
told to run
and the very first thing that runs is
this lovely console log
right this lovely console log gets put
onto the call stack right and since it's
the first thing in sorry it's the last
thing in it is going to be the what
if we look at this stack here's our
pancakes that are building up
our pancakes are building up this
log of house one since it is the last
pin
it is the first out so once our loop
executes right once this event loop
executes what we're gonna wind up seeing
is we're gonna pull
that
log
off the stack
and we will see in the console house one
now
the
next thing that happens
is we try to run the next line of code
which is the set timeout
and so we looped around
and once again we're back at the call
stack
and
set timeout is the last in so it's going
to be the what
first out
now
can javascript
execute this
off of the call stack like can it run it
directly from the call stack what do we
know about set timeout
no
we know that set timeout is a web api so
the event loop enables us to hand
this set timeout
to the web apis and that's exactly what
happens
it gets handed over to the web apis and
this could take
forever
this could take an hour it does not
matter it could take a full hour we've
handed that off to the web api it's
going to do its thing
now
the event loop runs again
and we have this last bit of code that's
going to execute
and so now
on the stack
is the third console log
right it's the third console log right
now since this log
is the last in
it's going to be the what
first out
does it matter
that our set timeout finished
does it matter that our set timeout
finished
no
because when the set timeout finished
it went to
the queue
it didn't get added to the stack right
away
when the web api finished
it went to this task queue or job queue
it's kind of a different way of talking
on there's also like micro macro queues
a bunch of other stuff right but it goes
into a queue
and we need that to happen
because the web api could have took an
hour it could have took one second it
doesn't matter
so when the web api was done it doesn't
immediately
right doesn't immediately go on to the
stack
it goes into the queue
all right now
we can see that there is this lovely
log that is on the call stack
so what's going to run first
last in
first out so console log of house 3 is
going to execute
and we are going to see in the console
we're going to see in the console house
3. now the event loop runs again
and it notices
that there is nothing
left
on the call stack
and so if there's nothing left on the
call stack what do you think actually
happens
this lovely event loop
looks to the queue
and we know this set timeout this
promise right this promise that came
from the web api
it's in a queue and a queue is what kind
of data structure
it's a first in
first out
so that means this q
is a first and first out so that means
eventually
this is going to get added since it's
the first thing it's going to get added
to the call stack
once the call stack is empty
right it's added to the call stack
because the call stack is empty
and so now
we have the promise that came from the
set timeout web api
right
and since this is the last in
it's going to be the what
first out
beautiful so then it'll eventually run
on the last loop and we'll see house two
so this is why
right this is why
this is why
even though there's a zero delay
it's still console logs to
last
right
now a lot of folks are saying what
happened to maine that was over here
what do you think happened to maine
if the stack is a last in first out
and the stuff that is in the queue
doesn't run until the stack is done what
happened
it finished it ran right it was it went
through it ran and then once the call
stack was empty there is nothing left in
the stack
right once it was empty nothing left in
the stack well then we went to the queue
to start putting stuff on the stack
but stacks are a last in
first out structure so there's no way
that we could have added stuff to that
stack right
we couldn't have added stuff to the
stack
right
until it was done
and so this is where that delay is
coming from this idea that
when we use set timeout
it got added to the stack
the event loop ran it took it off the
stack and handed it to the web apis and
web apis we could have dozens of web
apis that are happening all at the same
time
and we have a bunch of web apis that are
all happening at the same time
right
and as each web api finishes where does
it go
right like this one could finish
and then this one could finish
where they are they're all going to the
queue so let's say this is one
two three and four right
two could finish first
and go into the queue
and then we have two
then an hour later one could finish and
that could go into the queue
and then 10 minutes later three could
finish and that would go into the few
queue and then four could finish right
it doesn't matter the beautiful thing is
that all this asynchronous stuff that
we've just been handing off to the
browser the reason it works is because
it's not affecting the stack
when it finishes it goes into the queue
and once the stack is empty
then we can go look in the queue
all right let's run it back
all right
whenever our javascript starts running
we always have this main that starts the
running right so the main is going to
tell it to start running
and it's going to tell the file that we
have here to start running
the very first thing that gets added to
the stack is what
what's the very first thing that add
what that gets added to the stack
yeah the first console log
is gonna get added to the stack so we'll
see that
right that first console log is added to
the stack the event loop runs
and
we see that the log is on the stack and
so it's time to execute that console log
because the stack is a
last in
first out
structure and since this log is the last
in it's going to be the first out and
we're going to see that log be put
into
it it just runs it executes right so we
see that that console log actually
happen
now
the next thing that runs
right we we come around
and we see this next line of code the
set timeout is gonna be put on the call
stack
right
have we gotten to like the thing i think
people are getting tripped up is right
here have we had enough loops for main
to come off the stack
right if after each loop it runs the
next line of code right it's single
threaded right if we just ran once
we have to grab that next line of code
main hasn't had a chance to come off the
stack yet it won't have a chance to come
off the stack until it's empty
right so we we looped around and we're
gonna grab this next line of code the
set timeout goes on to the stack
right so the loop comes around it's time
to execute
the set timeout but can javascript
handle the set timeout
no
so it gets handed off to the web api
beautiful so now this set timeout is
doing its own thing
it it it could take an hour if we wanted
it to it does not matter it's often the
browser doing its own thing doing its
own asynchronous thing it's having fun
right it's having fun doing its own
thing but the event loop don't stop burt
doesn't stop so now it's going to go
grab
the next line of code right it goes it
loops and grabs the next line of code
and so that next line of code is that
console log that comes onto the call
stack
now it just so happens that since there
was no delay
in our set timeout
that that that set timeout resolved
very quickly
right that set timeout it went off to
the web api
but it resolved so quickly because it
was a z it was zero there was no delay
so the web api resolves it so quickly
but it can't add it to the
it can't add it to the call stack
anything that comes as the result of the
web api all those promises get put what
all those promises get what put what
get put in the queue
exactly and we only go to the queue when
we only go to the qn
when the call stack is empty exactly so
we loop around
the loop ignores the queue it looks at
the stack and says oh this console log
is on the stack so time to execute that
console log
right
it loops around it sees that main is
there
it gets main execute doesn't really do
anything right the main executes right
it doesn't do anything it was just there
to start the javascript file but there's
nothing there so that executes and then
it comes around another time
and now it sees that the call stack is
empty
so on the next loop
it looks at the queue and says all right
give me the first in because the queue
is a first in first out structure
right there's nothing in the stack it's
time to go to the queue
since the queue is a first in first out
structure
it grabs the the set timeout or whatever
whatever result came back from the set
timeout remember web api's return or
what the web api's return to what
yeah back in the day it would be a
callback that was sitting in the queue
but now it's a promise that's sitting in
the queue and so the event loop says all
right there's nothing on the stack we're
going to grab the first
the first
thing that's in the queue and we're
going to put that on the stack
all right
loop runs around it executes that
promise that is sitting on the stack
and we see
console log house 2
right then
it runs again to check to see if there's
anything else new in the task queue and
it's not
so we're kind of done for now
but the cool thing is we could have
handed off a lot of stuff to web apis
and they all could have they could have
all asynchronously finished at different
points in time and be put into the queue
at different points in time and then as
the call stack empties we start putting
stuff from the queue
onto the
stack
you get know example the fetching pad
would be the exact same thing with a
fetch
where if this line was let's say a fetch
the fetch would be put onto this stack
the loop would come around javascript
would be able to execute it so it would
pass it off to the web api the fetch
would be here
waiting for data to come back from
whatever right eventually the dog ceo
see dog ceo api responds
it takes that
promise
right that has all that data in it and
that gets put on the queue
eventually the call stack is empty
and we grab that
that promise from the queue
and put it on the stack
stack never waits javascript is single
threaded it is synchronous it cannot
wait the event loop is handling all this
asynchronous stuff for us
good question
what if
house three had a delay of two seconds
would it still log um
before house two so let's see if we had
um
if we had like a actually i'm gonna save
this for sunday i'm gonna say that i
don't wanna i don't get two people in
the head i don't get to and i'm gonna
say this for sunday
uh it's a really good question ask that
question on sunday i don't wanna get
people too lost to the sauce but it's a
really great question think through it i
want you to think through this for
homework and then come on sunday we'll
do it
what if this had a set timeout
of zero seconds as well what happens
what if it had three seconds
right think about it when does it get
pushed to
the web api
and where does it show up in the queue
which thing would show up in the queue
first
right because remember q is a first in
first out structure
so even if they're both web apis what
gets added to the queue first because
whatever gets added to the queue first
is getting added to the stack first
it's a really interesting question
so i don't want to i know where i pushed
you want to have that thought experiment
go for it come on sunday we're going to
do all we're going to run this all back
on sunday if you're like leon you did it
two or three times it's still not still
not there come back on sunday we're
going to run through this a couple more
times we'll do a bunch of other examples
with it and play with it
i have a little bit more detailed
version of this and then remember your
homework your homework is to watch
philip roberts video that goes even
deeper on this and so i think you're
you're going to have a lot of fun
learning a lot of cool stuff all right
so underneath the hood this is what's
happening
let's go like you now understand like if
you took every every developer that
writes javascript you're now in a
percentile of developers that um
that
that just doesn't understand how this
stuff works
right like there's i guarantee there are
so many developers that are writing
javascript professionally that have no
idea under they have no idea that this
is what actually is happening underneath
the hood and this is our competitive
advantage folks it's how we eat their
lunch
you're now elite exactly
all right
time to talk about some back end baby
so now we understand what's happening in
the browser let's talk about the back
end all right
does
javascript have access to the dom
built in
nah
nope
javascript needed the web apis to handle
all that asynchronous stuff
and a bunch of other stuff in the
browser
right without the web apis and without
the event loop handing that stuff off to
the web apis wouldn't be able to do the
things that we were able to do
so javascript is a language that can
only do
what the hosting environment allows and
when we're running javascript in the
browser the browser becomes
our
hosting environment now
what do servers need
chat what two things do servers need to
do their job remember we make requests
to servers and servers deliver responses
what two things do servers really need
they need network access and they need
disk access if they can't hear those
requests that are coming off on the
network and respond to them it's not a
server it literally can't serve and then
if it can't like grab the files that it
wants to serve it's not a server it
can't live up to its name of serving if
it can't listen to the request to
generate a response and it can't live up
to its name if it can't literally grab
the files to serve so servers need
disk access like access to the files on
the hard drive or the solid state drive
and they need access to a network like
access to the internet to hear those
requests to generate those responses it
doesn't have those two things it can't
be a server
cool
so what if there was a hosting
environment that allowed javascript to
have disk and network access because
does javascript by itself have disk and
network access
no
five seconds
so what if there was a hosting
environment that allowed javascript to
have disk and network access
[Music]
hey does this work
node.js baby
it's the environment
right the environment
that enables us to have access to the
disk and the network that's a node
now when we go to node's website they
have this like
really bad thing here
i just don't get like
if you like
you all hug them let's get in here real
quick
you were all gonna go out into the world
right
you're already badass developers you're
going to become even more badass you're
going to eventually be in charge of
large projects
you're eventually going to
uh create wonderful open source
libraries please
write what your thing does
in plain language so that your fellow
hundred devs know what the heck you're
talking about you can have the nerd
version below but give the real human
version above so that we actually
understand what the heck is going on no
more disrespect the disrespect stops
here with us
cool
so node.js is a javascript runtime built
on chrome's v8 oh gosh
the same [__] that lets you run
javascript in the browser can now be
used to run javascript on servers
desktop and pretty much anywhere else
these days
right so it's just a place to run your
javascript
and so javascript runtime just means a
place to run your javascript
and it uses chrome's v8 engine so the va
engine that we used in the browser that
helped us with the compilation
that helped us with the memory
management the garbage collecting all
that stuff we can now use that like on
the server
now when we're doing node right
when we're using node the v8 engine is
doing all the heavy lifting remember
we write javascript that's human
readable but that has to be broken down
into something that the computer can
understand and so v8 is doing that heavy
lifting and it's not really a compiler
we call it an engine for a reason
and the reason we call it an engine is
because it does more than just it's more
than just a compiler right it's a it's a
friend
it's a confident
right
it's a lover
and it also does a lot of other stuff
for us
it handles our memory management it
handles our garbage collecting
right
so it's it's way way more than just the
compiler or interpreter we're not there
yet but we'll get there soon it does so
much more
okay
all right
now
just like the browser the other
environment right
right just like the other environment
the browser node is a new environment
that comes with a bunch
of stuff
right it comes with a bunch of stuff
so
the browser came with web apis
node comes with a bunch of modules
it comes with built-in libraries or
collections of functions that do all the
heavy lifting so the http module is
basically just an object that has a
bunch of functions in it right that
people have written that help us access
the network the fs module is just a
an object with a bunch of functions in
it that help us like get files off of
the hard drive or a solid state drive
whatever we're using
and we get access to millions of other
packages via package managers like mpm
yarn or whatever else the cool kids are
using these days
right so you don't you're not limited to
just the core modules that come with it
but you can install and get access to
all these other modules
that you can get through npm
now
since we're not running javascript in
the browser we don't get web apis
anymore
right
right we don't get we don't get web apis
anymore because we're not running in the
browser but what we do get are c or c
plus plus apis and so the cool thing is
we're writing javascript that javascript
is being broken down into something the
computer can understand by the v8 engine
but then we're getting access to all
these other like really fast like super
fast
super
well built out
things that enable us to do the same
stuff that like the web apis did in the
browser right but this is where when
people say node is fast it's coming from
this right it's coming from this it's
that we're sitting on the shoulders of
giants the stuff that node is using is
really like c and c plus plus underneath
the hood and we're going to notice some
things right so it's a little bit
different
because in the browser we're using lib
event
but in
node we're using libov right so it's a
different implementation of it where
things are similar but they're slightly
different because the environments the
hosting environments are slightly
different in the browser we had web apis
and then in node we get c and c plus
plus apis which makes node a really
really fast language and we get all the
same goodies that we're used to
like libov instead of but it's lib
bubble instead of lib event right we get
all the wonderful async stuff we get all
the event loop stuff it's just handled
by slightly different things
all right so i asked you to install node
if you haven't you're going to have to
do that if you want to do the homework
we talked about last time about release
schedules it's up to you what release
you want to start with um 16 is totally
fine 18 is totally fine it won't stop
you from participating in this class um
go with whatever release you want to go
with i'll be using
and then we started with this very
simple node server
so with our very simple node server we
used the two core modules we used the
http module to set up the server to
listen for requests and then help us
generate a response
and we use the fs or the file system
module to get the html files off of our
disk right and with these two modules
combined we were able to build a very
very simple
server
right
and with this very simple server we saw
that the http module came with a create
server method so somebody's already
built out a method that creates the
server we told it what port to listen on
and then whenever somebody went to that
local host 8000 whenever they went to
that port whenever they went to that
to that that url it made a request to
our server and that request
when we heard it we went to our file
system
we found the html file and we responded
with it that's all we did we just heard
a request
and we responded now
do i have this memorized no i'm pretty
sure like i could type this out right
now
but it's not something that i have
committed to memory it's not something
you have to commit to memory
this is not something that you would
really use every day
we're going to get to something called
express next week that makes this
a lot easier a lot of this like really
like
detailed code that we're seeing here
like handling the header and writing the
data and responding express handles for
us and so creating the server express
will handle for us listening to requests
and handling response express will
handle for us so this is like this is
some nerd stuff right here we're talking
about like very very simple
base level stuff here using just the
core modules of node we're able to build
a simple server and become full stack
web developers we're already software
engineers but as soon as you ran this
simple server you became full stack
cool so tonight we still have like 22
minutes or so i want to continue to
right
i want to continue to build off of this
very simple server idea and we're going
to look at a more complex backend right
so we're going to look at a more complex
back end and so let's go ahead and look
at a more complex back end
and
i'm going to close what we have here
and we're going to look at this
node backend simple json and so if we
open this up we have a lovely server.js
we see we have some html files that we
can serve up we got some beautiful
things here
so to run this node file what do i have
to do
i've opened up in vs code what do i have
to do to run this node file
yep node
server.js
all right
now something happened here we got an
error
we look
it says it cannot find module
when you get the cannot find module what
do you think just happened here
what didn't i do
there's two things that could have
happened here
right two things that could have
happened
one
i didn't install my modules
or two
i'm in the wrong directory
so what happened here is i'm in the
wrong directory i'm still in my class
folder i have to go into
my node backend simple folder for this
to work so cd node
backend simple json and let's try again
now
instead
instead of typing out nerd server js
again what could i do
what could i do
is ever take me out again i could just
hit the up arrow boom
there we go i hit up twice and there you
go node server.js
all right i got my repl
let me move this over a little bit here
my rep will sitting there which means
that my server
is still running
right now
my server is running right now if we go
to
let's see this let's find the port
localhost
8000 let me go to localhost 8000
we see that it served up my site
and it's working now
yours might not work
because if we look
if we look
you can see that it's requiring some of
the core modules
but it's also requiring this figlet
thing
what the heck is figlet
all right what the heck is figlet let me
show you what figlet does and then i'm
going to show you how to install it so
uh here i'm on my localhost 8000 let me
go to a route that does not exist
[Music]
right
hopefully that's not a route that exists
and so let's go ahead and hit enter
and i get this lovely 404.
but look at the 404
it's beautiful
that's that's some good ascii art right
there right so what figlet does
is figlet takes in a string
and turns it into ascii art
but that's not something that comes
built in with node and so if you want to
use figlet we would have to install it
and so i already installed it because i
of course ran my code before class but
you would have to do mpm install
biglit
and then once you did npm install figlit
you would now have access to all the
modules that this file requires
cool
let's go ahead is my server running
right now
i'm going to be installed twice nothing
it won't really do anything
my server's not running right now how do
you know how do you know my server is
not running right now
i better go catch it
because i i don't have the like the i
have my repple back right if we look
like i have my like place where i can
type
um so
if i run it you see i don't have the
place where i can type back right you
can see i i don't have like my my my
ability to type there anymore so that's
how i know my server is running right
now so let's go catch it
and let's see what this server can do we
already saw that it has a 404
but we have like this lovely like main
page
uh we also have some other pages that we
can go to other
other doesn't it sorry it's other page
it's all the 404 again other page
we have other other page
other page
so these are all pages that the server
is serving up
and the cool thing is i also have a very
simple api that i built
right a very simple api that i built to
where
if we enter in any name except for one
we get something back so let's go ahead
and enter in john
does anyone know who john is
john is bob's evil brother
yeah john is bob's evil twin brother
uh so if you see the the red the red
emotes those are jonomotes uh so yeah
john is bob's evil twin brother so if we
ask for john
we get unknown unknown unknown
any relation to papa i don't know maybe
that's where the hate all started maybe
oh that's the lore expanding
[Laughter]
right so we type in drama get unknown
unknown unknown
let's put in somebody that we all know
leon
and i'm gonna put in leon and i get back
oh leon
boss man
baller
i wrote the api so i get to make it say
whatever i want
all right
so humble
but if we put in any other name
all right put in some other name here
let's let's put in another what's
somebody big that everyone would know
somebody said obama simba
there we go put in simba
oh no no no no we put in leon
leon
boss man
baller all right let's take a look at
this code so we saw a lot of stuff
that's happening here we have not only
an api that we're getting responses back
from we have the ability to serve up
multiple pages the main page other page
other other page when we request pages
that don't exist we get a 404 and this
is all working
let's go and take a look
so
once again we are using
the http module to create our server so
all of this here
is creating the server
right all of it's creating the server
but what we're going to have to do
is we are going to have to tell the
server what happens
for every single request that is made so
when we go to the main page
what route are we hitting like when we
go to localhost 8000 what is our route
it's forward slash right so what we're
going to do is we're going to look at
what page we are on so this this hot
mess of a string here what this tells us
is what path we are on so when we go up
here localhost 8000 is this path
other page would be this path other
other page would be a different path so
what we're able to do
is whenever somebody makes a request to
our server
we're able to see what path they're
requesting
if they're on the main page
we are going to send them what what are
we going to send them if they're on
localhost 8000 what are we sending them
we're sending them the index.html
now let's brain blast back
to our beginnings of html
and when this html file loads just by
looking at it what else do we know it's
going to load
he's going to need to load css
he's going to need to load javascript
right
and so does that come for free or what
do we need
does it just magically know how to do
this
does it magically know how to give you
css
magically know how to give you
javascript no
it has to be part of the server so if we
scroll down past all this stuff
we can see that oh if they ask for the
css file boom
send them the css file
if they ask for the javascript file
boom send them the javascript file
if they ask right
if we if they ask for
the other page
will we send them the other page.html
if they ask for other other page well
boom here we hand them the other other
page html
if they ask for
a response from our api
here's all the code that handles the
response from the api
right so that means in our client-side
javascript
there's probably oh my gosh look at this
async function let's go
look how clean this is with the async
right
we know that we're making a request
but notice that there's no url here it's
just the slash
we're making a request to our own server
and our server set up to hear that
request
instead of to hear that request and know
what to do now
this looks like a hot mess
because it is a hot mess
this is what we had to do back in the
day before we had express
every single route had to have a
response
and we had to code it all out it was
messy
right it was messy it look
i don't like this but express rides in
on their white horse and saves the day
express comes in and saves the day so we
don't have to like actually write all
this stuff now i'm going to ask you a
question
could i write all this from memory
could i myself that's been coding 10
plus years
write all this stuff
hell
no if you're looking at this and like
leon i have no idea how to how you would
do this i don't know how to do it either
i can't write this
i have no idea what
i i would try i would try to write the
first head and i'd be done
right
no way
it's just it's just not something that
i've committed to memory because i don't
have to
express does all this heavy lifting for
me these days
but
what i should be able to do
is read through this and know what is
happening
right so that's what i need you to do
i need you to read through this
right and figure out what is happening
and that is your homework
before thursday's class
i need you to read through this file
and figure out what the heck is going on
figure out all right well if the page
was this we're sending the html file
figure out what's happening in this hot
mess
of an api request play with it
right get lost in it
right
watch the videos that were assigned for
homework a lot of stuff was covered go
back and watch mine wolf's stream team
they already went through this so if you
get lost
you know the stream team is here to help
so mine will already walk through all
this it's it's on their stream from past
sunday they talk through all this but i
need before you watch my wolf's video
i need you to spend time on it on your
own
one of the first things most of you are
going to do
one of the first things you are going to
do on the job
right
is they're going to unleash you on a
bunch of old code
and tell you to make it better
they're going to tell you to make it
more modern
right they're going to tell you to get
in with the old stuff and make it better
so
guess what we need to start practicing
as part of program i'm giving you a
bunch of old code
first step
figure out what the heck is going on
second step is
how would you make it better would you
do a switch case would you do something
else
right
and then once you feel comfortable that
you've looked through it you you have an
idea what's happening you've maybe come
up with an idea to to figure out how you
might improve it i would watch my most
video to to see how how they worked
through it and then come to class on
thursday where we dig in deeper
all right that's the homework you got
about seven minutes of time to work
through it
well that's the homework don't let this
block of code scare you
you have to get used to
seeing a hot mess of code
jumping in the muck and figuring it out
this is literally what you will do
for the first three months on the job at
a lot of companies you're gonna get a
hot mess of code you're gonna have to
jump in go line by line figuring out
what the heck is happening
seeing the patterns playing with it and
when you get stuck
where do you go
when you get stuck where do you go you
go to discord
you go to discord you ask questions hey
i've tried my hardest i googled my
brains out i could not find it
you ask on discord
you watch mine was video from the from
sunday
right you have to get better at this
part of the process this is an important
step in your growth this idea of giving
a hot mess of code figuring out what's
happening getting into it getting into
the muck
get lost in it play with it figure out
what the heck's going on and then we
come back on thursday we'll go deeper
into it i'll explain everything i'll go
line by line for you but you got to put
in that work first because this is
something you're going to do on the job
a lot
and then if it still doesn't make sense
you come back on sunday and we're gonna
spend a lot of time on this stuff again
as well